---
layout: post
title:  "Doorman"
date:   2015-08-31 16:13:42
categories: projects
image: images/doorman.png
---

In the summer semester 2014, me and 3 other students were looking for a new place to live.
We eventually found a nice and modern flat, which was sublet to us by a PhD student.
Unfortunately, the landlord of the place was not happy about four students moving in and
refused to give us two additional keys, which meant that we had only 2 keys for 4 students :(
Making copies of our keys was not an option, since you need an special agreement from the
landlord to be able to make copies.

For that reason, I decided to make a little remote controlled robot, which could open the
door from inside. The robot brain consisted of a raspberry pi, which controlled a stepper
motor to open the apartment door and a reed relay to open the house door (electrical buzzer).
The stepper motor was driven through two ULN2003 Darlington transistor arrays which were
connected to the GPIO pins of the raspberry pi. The shaft of the stepper motor was
connected to the door lock via a rope and a stick (see video below).

I found a simple python script on the internet which could be tuned to drive the stepper motor
in unipolar mode. The script, together with another script to activate the reed relay for the
house door, could be called via SSH from my laptop or any other device whose public key was authorized.
Pubic key authentication was the main authorization method enabling me to add or remove
devices which was quite handy when I hosted some of my friends from Germany.

The basic opening process worked like this: At first, a new user installs the Android app
(received .apk from me) on his phone, generates a public key with the app and sends
the public key to me (by email or messenger). Once I had added the public key to the
*authrized_keys* file on the pi, the user was able to open house and apartment door with the
app once the phone was connected to the same wifi as the raspberry pi (I set up a static ip
address for the raspberry pi). I also set up dyndns to be able to open even without being in the
same network as the raspberry. However, I have never needed this feature since my flatmates
never forgot their keys :D.

The video of the opening process can be seen below. Yes, it is a badly recorded video, but I think
it explains most of it. It was super fun tinkering around with this project that I later called
*Doorman*. Opening the door with the android app always made me smile.

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/-QZS3CHGylk" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

[youtube]:      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-QZS3CHGylk
